Editor’s Note: This editorial is part of a series that looks at the challenges of tackling the growing federal debt and the specific programs that drive it. Read the previous installment on Medicare.America must keep faith with its military veterans. We owe the greatest debt to those who risked their lives to keep us free.Sign up for the Prompt 2024 newsletter for opinions on the biggest questions in politicsArrowRightBut the  promises America has made to the women and men who have served in uniform are due for a review. The budget for the Department of Veterans Affairs has grown at a dramatic pace since 9/11 — from roughly $45 billion in 2001 to more than $300 billion this year.Many factors contribute to a sharp rise in veteran spending — the aging of post-9/11 veterans, numerous enhancements made by Congress to existing benefit programs, and a more muscular outreach by the department to alert veterans to the care and benefits on offer. In addition, the veterans of Iraq, Afghanistan and other post-9/11 conflicts have higher disability rates compared with all veterans, the result of improved battlefield medicine and a broader understanding of the array of service-connected injuries and disabilities.AdvertisementIf we owe our veterans every support, we also owe them a measure of fiscal responsibility. Today, we offer suggestions about how to carefully prune the department’s kudzu-like spending growth.Follow this authorEditorial Board's opinionsFollowThe department’s budget is composed chiefly of two parts: Roughly half provides health care to veterans — and that budget has grown in recent years with inflation in the medical sector and amid a broad bipartisan recognition that VA clinics and hospitals were for too long poorly funded and managed. The reset over the past decade took too long to put in place, but it has been met with positive reviews.Readers respond: Don’t touch veterans’ disability benefitsIt is the other  half  — the portion that provides for income and disability payments — that lawmakers should scrutinize. Veterans Affairs pays disabled veterans monthly stipends according to the level of service-related injury. Payments  rise, on a scale of 1 to 100, from minor injuries to complete impairment.AdvertisementThe ratings were established in 1945 and in many cases have not changed in decades. That means payments are generally based on the ability to perform work most needed generations ago, or what the Congressional Budget Office described as “manual or physical labor.” The skill sets needed and jobs available today — in an information and service economy — are in many cases different from those needed in the months and years after World War II.Disability payments based on those ratings go to veterans tax-free and continue, with some exceptions, for the entirety of a veteran’s life, and they are paid regardless of whether the recipient is working. Helped by sustained public campaigns (and credits for employers in the tax code), most veterans return to the civilian workforce after their service and are more likely to be employed today than nonveterans.  Disabled veterans return to the workforce at nearly the same rate as veterans without disabilities. By contrast, Social Security disability payments go only to those who cannot work.Skip to end of carouselAlso on the Editorial Board’s agendaarrow leftarrow rightLawyers plead guilty in racketeering case in Fulton County, Ga.The Biden administration announces more than $100 million to improve maternal health.Wisconsin Republicans back off impeachment threat against justice.Bahrain’s hunger strike ends, for now, after concessions to prisoners.A Saudi court sentences a retired teacher to death based on tweets.Attorneys for Donald Trump have pleaded guilty in the racketeering case led by Fulton County, Ga., District Attorney Fani T. Willis. Even those lawyers related to the deals focused on equipment-tampering in rural Coffee County are relevant to the former president — they help to establish the “criminal enterprise” of which prosecutors hope to prove Mr. Trump was the head. The news is a sign that the courts might be the place where 2020 election lies finally crash upon the rocks of reality. The Editorial Board wrote about the wide range of the indictment in August.The Department of Health and Human Services announced more than $103 million in funding to address the maternal health crisis. The money will boost access to mental health services, help states train more maternal health providers and bolster nurse midwifery programs. These initiatives are an encouraging step toward tackling major gaps in maternal health and well-being. In August, the Editorial Board wrote about how the United States can address its maternal mortality crisis.Wisconsin state Assembly Speaker Robin Vos (R) announced Tuesday that Republicans would allow the nonpartisan Legislative Reference Bureau to draw legislative maps, a dramatic reversal after years of opposing such an approach to redistricting. A new liberal majority on the state Supreme Court is expected to throw out the current maps, which make Wisconsin the most gerrymandered state in America. Mr. Vos has been threatening to impeach Justice Janet Protasiewicz, whose election this spring flipped control of the court, in a bid to keep those maps. This led to understandable outcry. Now it seems Mr. Vos is backing off his impeachment threat and his efforts to keep the state gerrymandered. Read our editorial on the Protasiewicz election here.Prisoners are eating again in Bahrain after the government agreed to let them spend more hours outside and expanded their access to visitors, a welcome development ahead of the crown prince’s visit to Washington this week. Activists say the monthlong hunger strike will resume on Sept. 30 if these promises aren’t kept. Read our editorial calling for the compassionate release of Abdulhadi al-Khawaja, a political prisoner since 2011 who participated in the strike.A retired teacher in Saudi Arabia, Muhammad al-Ghamdi, has been sentenced to death by the country’s Specialized Criminal Court solely based on his tweets, retweets and YouTube activity, according to Human Rights Watch. The court’s verdict, July 10, was based on two accounts on X, formerly Twitter, which had only a handful of followers. The posts criticized the royal family. The sentence is the latest example of dictatorships imposing harsh sentences on people who use social media for free expression, highlighted in our February editorial.1/6End of carouselOver the next eight years, disability payments to veterans (and their survivors) are expected to rise by nearly half,  from $130 billion a year to $192 billion a year. At the same time, the number of veterans receiving disability payments is expected to rise more modestly, from 5.7 million to 6.3 million, or slightly more than 10 percent, over the same period.AdvertisementThough the Department of Veterans Affairs revises its disability ratings from time to time, Congress should consider a broader modernization of  the disability ratings system. And lawmakers should consider means-testing disability benefits for veterans who are high earners. The Congressional Budget Office estimates limiting payments for veterans who earn more than $170,000 a year would save $253 billion over the next decade. Congress could alternatively tax the benefits, or some portion of them, particularly for new recipients with  high incomes.Readers respond: This is the true cost of America’s warsNone of these steps would be politically easy. Proposing and voting for new benefits for veterans have long been among the few policy areas that both Democrats and Republicans support. We also know that the array of benefits offered by VA plays an important role in attracting and retaining the all-volunteer force — especially in an era of low unemployment and rising wages in the civilian sector.But the moral responsibility Americans have  to those who fought for the country is of diminished value if it does not align with the fiscal responsibility Americans have to keep their financial house safe and sound.
